docs/workflow/using-dotnet-cli.md, before:


# Using your .NET Runtime build with .NET SDK

This walkthrough explains how to run your own app against your local build using only the .NET SDK.

Testing your local build this way is quite realistic - more like a real user. However it takes longer because you have to build the package. Each build can take 10 minutes altogether.

If you want to use a faster method, you may want to use one of these walkthroughs instead:

- [Using Your Build - Update from raw build output](./testing/using-your-build.md)
- [Using CoreRun To Run .NET Application](./testing/using-corerun.md)
- [Dogfooding .NET SDK](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/project/dogfooding.md).

## Prerequisites

All paths in examples below are Windows-style but the procedure is otherwise exactly the same on Unix.

1. Successfully built this repository including the shared framework package and thus have files of the form shown below. From now on we call this folder your NuGet package folder.

```
    <your-repo-root>\artifacts\packages\<configuration>\Shipping\
```

If you don't have this folder, you may have built binaries but not packages. Try building from the root with a command like `build.cmd clr+libs+host+packs -c release`.

2. Acquired the latest nightly .NET SDK from [here](https://github.com/dotnet/installer) and added its root folder to your [path](requirements/windows-requirements.md#adding-to-the-default-path-variable)

## First Run

### 1. Create new folder for the app

`mkdir helloWorld`

From now on all instructions relate to this folder as "app folder".

### 2. Create NuGet.Config file

The build script creates NuGet packages and puts them to `artifacts\packages\<configuration>\Shipping\`. .NET SDK has no idea about its existence and we need to tell it where to search for the packages.

Please run `dotnet new nugetconfig` in the app folder and replace the created `NuGet.Config` file content with:

```xml
<configuration>
  <config>
    <!-- CHANGE THIS PATH BELOW to any empty folder. NuGet will cache things here, and that's convenient because you can delete it to reset things -->
    <add key="globalPackagesFolder" value="c:\localcache" />
  </config>
  <packageSources>
    <!--To inherit the global NuGet package sources remove the <clear/> line below -->
    <clear />
    <!-- This feed is for any packages you didn't build. See https://github.com/dotnet/installer#installers-and-binaries -->
    <add key="dotnet6" value="https://pkgs.dev.azure.com/dnceng/public/_packaging/dotnet6/nuget/v3/index.json" />
    <!-- CHANGE THIS PATH BELOW to your local output path -->
    <add key="local runtime" value="C:\runtime\artifacts\packages\Release\Shipping\" />
  </packageSources>
</configuration>
```

### 3. Create and update the Project file

Please run `dotnet new console` in the app folder and update the created `.csproj` file:

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <OutputType>Exe</OutputType>
    <TargetFramework>net6.0</TargetFramework>
    <RuntimeIdentifier>win-x64</RuntimeIdentifier>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <FrameworkReference Update="Microsoft.NETCore.App" RuntimeFrameworkVersion="6.0.0-dev" />
  </ItemGroup>

</Project>
```

**You have to set the correct values for `RuntimeIdentifier` (RI) and `RuntimeFrameworkVersion`.**

You can generally figure that out by looking at the packages you found in your output.
In our example you will see there is a package with the name `Microsoft.NETCore.App.Runtime.win-x64.6.0.0-dev.nupkg`

```
Microsoft.NETCore.App.Runtime.win-x64.6.0.0-dev.nupkg
                              ^-RI--^ ^version^
```

### 4. Change Program.cs

To make sure that you run against your local build of this repo please change your `Main` method in `Program.cs` file to:

```cs
static void Main(string[] args)
{
    var coreAssemblyInfo = System.Diagnostics.FileVersionInfo.GetVersionInfo(typeof(object).Assembly.Location);
    Console.WriteLine($"Hello World from .NET {coreAssemblyInfo.ProductVersion}");
    Console.WriteLine($"The location is {typeof(object).Assembly.Location}");
}
```

### 5. Publish

Now is the time to publish. The publish step will trigger restore and build. You can iterate on build by calling `dotnet build` as
needed.

```cmd
dotnet publish
```

Make sure that restoring done by `dotnet publish` installed the explicit version of the Runtime that you have specified:

```
c:\runtime\helloworld>dotnet publish
Microsoft (R) Build Engine version 16.7.0-preview-20360-03+188921e2f for .NET
Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

  Determining projects to restore...
  Restored c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj (in 114 ms).
  You are using a preview version of .NET. See: https://aka.ms/dotnet-core-preview
  helloworld -> c:\runtime\helloworld\bin\Debug\net6.0\win-x64\helloworld.dll
  helloworld -> c:\runtime\helloworld\bin\Debug\net6.0\win-x64\publish\
```

#### Troubleshooting Publish

If you see something like the message below it means that it has failed to restore your local runtime packages. Check your `NuGet.config` file and paths used in it.

```
c:\runtime\helloworld>dotnet publish
Microsoft (R) Build Engine version 16.7.0-preview-20360-03+188921e2f for .NET
Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

  Determining projects to restore...
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1102: Unable to find package Microsoft.NETCore.App.Runtime.win-x64 with version (= 6.0.0-does-not-exist)
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1102:   - Found 25 version(s) in nuget [ Nearest version: 6.0.0-preview.1.20120.5 ]
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1102:   - Found 1 version(s) in local runtime [ Nearest version: 6.0.0-dev ]
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1102: Unable to find package Microsoft.NETCore.App.Host.win-x64 with version (= 6.0.0-does-not-exist)
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1102:   - Found 27 version(s) in nuget [ Nearest version: 6.0.0-preview.1.20120.5 ]
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1102:   - Found 1 version(s) in local runtime [ Nearest version: 6.0.0-dev ]
  Failed to restore c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj (in 519 ms).
```

If you see error messages like these below, it means it has failed to restore other packages you need that you didn't build. Check your `NuGet.config` file includes the other feed.
```
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1101: Unable to find package Microsoft.WindowsDesktop.App.Runtime.win-x64. No packages exist with this id in source(s): local runtime
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1101: Unable to find package Microsoft.AspNetCore.App.Runtime.win-x64. No packages exist with this id in source(s): local runtime
```

If you see error messages like this, it means you do not have a new enough SDK. Please visit https://github.com/dotnet/installer#installers-and-binaries and install a newer SDK.

```
C:\Program Files\dotnet\sdk\5.0.100\Sdks\Microsoft.NET.Sdk\targets\Microsoft.NET.TargetFrameworkInference.targets(141,5): error NETSDK1045: The current .NET SDK does not support targeting .NET Core 6.0.  Either target .NET Core 5.0 or lower, or use a version of the .NET SDK that supports .NET Core 6.0. [c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj]
```

### 6. Run the app

After you publish you will find all the binaries needed to run your application under `bin\Debug\net6.0\win-x64\publish\`.
To run the application simply run the EXE that is in this publish directory (it is the name of the app, or specified in the project file).

```
.\bin\Debug\net6.0\win-x64\publish\HelloWorld.exe
```

Running the app should tell you the version and where the location of System.Private.CoreLib in the publish directory:

```
Hello World from .NET 6.0.0-dev
The location is c:\runtime\helloworld\bin\Debug\net6.0\win-x64\publish\System.Private.CoreLib.dll
```

**Congratulations! You have just run your first app against your local build of this repo**

## How to then consume updated packages

Once you have successfully consumed a package, you probably want to make changes, update the package, and have your app consume it again. Normally NuGet would ignore your updated package, because its version number hasn't changed. The easiest way to avoid that is to simply delete your NuGet cache. To make this easy, in the `NuGet.config` file above, we used `globalPackagesFolder` to set a local package cache. Simply delete that folder and publish again and your app will pick up the new package.

So the steps are:

### 1. Build the package again

```cmd
build.cmd clr+libs+host+packs -c release
```

If you only changed libraries, `build.cmd libs+host+packs -c release` is a little faster; if you only changed clr, then `build.cmd clr+host+packs -c release`

### 2. Delete your local package cache

```cmd
rd /s /q c:\localcache
```

### 3. Publish again

```cmd
dotnet publish
```

Now your app will use your updated package.

Commit message:

How to force the -dev suffix
When building a tagged release the -dev suffix shown in step 3 is missing.

docs/workflow/using-dotnet-cli.md, after:


# Using your .NET Runtime build with .NET SDK

This walkthrough explains how to run your own app against your local build using only the .NET SDK.

Testing your local build this way is quite realistic - more like a real user. However it takes longer because you have to build the package. Each build can take 10 minutes altogether.

If you want to use a faster method, you may want to use one of these walkthroughs instead:

- [Using Your Build - Update from raw build output](./testing/using-your-build.md)
- [Using CoreRun To Run .NET Application](./testing/using-corerun.md)
- [Dogfooding .NET SDK](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/project/dogfooding.md).

## Prerequisites

All paths in examples below are Windows-style but the procedure is otherwise exactly the same on Unix.

1. Successfully built this repository including the shared framework package and thus have files of the form shown below. From now on we call this folder your NuGet package folder.
   
   ```
    <your-repo-root>\artifacts\packages\<configuration>\Shipping\
   ```

   If you don't have this folder, you may have built binaries but not packages. Try building from the root with a command like `build.cmd clr+libs+host+packs -c release`. If you are building from a tagged release commit you will not have the `-dev` suffix in your packages. You can force the `-dev` suffix (or a different custom `VersionSuffix`) by adding `/p:VersionSuffix=dev /p:DotNetFinalVersionKind=development` to your `build.cmd` line.

2. Acquired the latest nightly .NET SDK from [here](https://github.com/dotnet/installer) and added its root folder to your [path](requirements/windows-requirements.md#adding-to-the-default-path-variable)

## First Run

### 1. Create new folder for the app

`mkdir helloWorld`

From now on all instructions relate to this folder as "app folder".

### 2. Create NuGet.Config file

The build script creates NuGet packages and puts them to `artifacts\packages\<configuration>\Shipping\`. .NET SDK has no idea about its existence and we need to tell it where to search for the packages.

Please run `dotnet new nugetconfig` in the app folder and replace the created `NuGet.Config` file content with:

```xml
<configuration>
  <config>
    <!-- CHANGE THIS PATH BELOW to any empty folder. NuGet will cache things here, and that's convenient because you can delete it to reset things -->
    <add key="globalPackagesFolder" value="c:\localcache" />
  </config>
  <packageSources>
    <!--To inherit the global NuGet package sources remove the <clear/> line below -->
    <clear />
    <!-- This feed is for any packages you didn't build. See https://github.com/dotnet/installer#installers-and-binaries -->
    <add key="dotnet6" value="https://pkgs.dev.azure.com/dnceng/public/_packaging/dotnet6/nuget/v3/index.json" />
    <!-- CHANGE THIS PATH BELOW to your local output path -->
    <add key="local runtime" value="C:\runtime\artifacts\packages\Release\Shipping\" />
  </packageSources>
</configuration>
```

### 3. Create and update the Project file

Please run `dotnet new console` in the app folder and update the created `.csproj` file:

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <OutputType>Exe</OutputType>
    <TargetFramework>net6.0</TargetFramework>
    <RuntimeIdentifier>win-x64</RuntimeIdentifier>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <FrameworkReference Update="Microsoft.NETCore.App" RuntimeFrameworkVersion="6.0.0-dev" />
  </ItemGroup>

</Project>
```

**You have to set the correct values for `RuntimeIdentifier` (RI) and `RuntimeFrameworkVersion`.**

You can generally figure that out by looking at the packages you found in your output.
In our example you will see there is a package with the name `Microsoft.NETCore.App.Runtime.win-x64.6.0.0-dev.nupkg`

```
Microsoft.NETCore.App.Runtime.win-x64.6.0.0-dev.nupkg
                              ^-RI--^ ^version^
```

### 4. Change Program.cs

To make sure that you run against your local build of this repo please change your `Main` method in `Program.cs` file to:

```cs
static void Main(string[] args)
{
    var coreAssemblyInfo = System.Diagnostics.FileVersionInfo.GetVersionInfo(typeof(object).Assembly.Location);
    Console.WriteLine($"Hello World from .NET {coreAssemblyInfo.ProductVersion}");
    Console.WriteLine($"The location is {typeof(object).Assembly.Location}");
}
```

### 5. Publish

Now is the time to publish. The publish step will trigger restore and build. You can iterate on build by calling `dotnet build` as
needed.

```cmd
dotnet publish
```

Make sure that restoring done by `dotnet publish` installed the explicit version of the Runtime that you have specified:

```
c:\runtime\helloworld>dotnet publish
Microsoft (R) Build Engine version 16.7.0-preview-20360-03+188921e2f for .NET
Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

  Determining projects to restore...
  Restored c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj (in 114 ms).
  You are using a preview version of .NET. See: https://aka.ms/dotnet-core-preview
  helloworld -> c:\runtime\helloworld\bin\Debug\net6.0\win-x64\helloworld.dll
  helloworld -> c:\runtime\helloworld\bin\Debug\net6.0\win-x64\publish\
```

#### Troubleshooting Publish

If you see something like the message below it means that it has failed to restore your local runtime packages. Check your `NuGet.config` file and paths used in it.

```
c:\runtime\helloworld>dotnet publish
Microsoft (R) Build Engine version 16.7.0-preview-20360-03+188921e2f for .NET
Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

  Determining projects to restore...
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1102: Unable to find package Microsoft.NETCore.App.Runtime.win-x64 with version (= 6.0.0-does-not-exist)
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1102:   - Found 25 version(s) in nuget [ Nearest version: 6.0.0-preview.1.20120.5 ]
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1102:   - Found 1 version(s) in local runtime [ Nearest version: 6.0.0-dev ]
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1102: Unable to find package Microsoft.NETCore.App.Host.win-x64 with version (= 6.0.0-does-not-exist)
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1102:   - Found 27 version(s) in nuget [ Nearest version: 6.0.0-preview.1.20120.5 ]
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1102:   - Found 1 version(s) in local runtime [ Nearest version: 6.0.0-dev ]
  Failed to restore c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj (in 519 ms).
```

If you see error messages like these below, it means it has failed to restore other packages you need that you didn't build. Check your `NuGet.config` file includes the other feed.
```
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1101: Unable to find package Microsoft.WindowsDesktop.App.Runtime.win-x64. No packages exist with this id in source(s): local runtime
c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj : error NU1101: Unable to find package Microsoft.AspNetCore.App.Runtime.win-x64. No packages exist with this id in source(s): local runtime
```

If you see error messages like this, it means you do not have a new enough SDK. Please visit https://github.com/dotnet/installer#installers-and-binaries and install a newer SDK.

```
C:\Program Files\dotnet\sdk\5.0.100\Sdks\Microsoft.NET.Sdk\targets\Microsoft.NET.TargetFrameworkInference.targets(141,5): error NETSDK1045: The current .NET SDK does not support targeting .NET Core 6.0.  Either target .NET Core 5.0 or lower, or use a version of the .NET SDK that supports .NET Core 6.0. [c:\runtime\helloworld\helloworld.csproj]
```

### 6. Run the app

After you publish you will find all the binaries needed to run your application under `bin\Debug\net6.0\win-x64\publish\`.
To run the application simply run the EXE that is in this publish directory (it is the name of the app, or specified in the project file).

```
.\bin\Debug\net6.0\win-x64\publish\HelloWorld.exe
```

Running the app should tell you the version and where the location of System.Private.CoreLib in the publish directory:

```
Hello World from .NET 6.0.0-dev
The location is c:\runtime\helloworld\bin\Debug\net6.0\win-x64\publish\System.Private.CoreLib.dll
```

**Congratulations! You have just run your first app against your local build of this repo**

## How to then consume updated packages

Once you have successfully consumed a package, you probably want to make changes, update the package, and have your app consume it again. Normally NuGet would ignore your updated package, because its version number hasn't changed. The easiest way to avoid that is to simply delete your NuGet cache. To make this easy, in the `NuGet.config` file above, we used `globalPackagesFolder` to set a local package cache. Simply delete that folder and publish again and your app will pick up the new package.

So the steps are:

### 1. Build the package again

```cmd
build.cmd clr+libs+host+packs -c release
```

If you only changed libraries, `build.cmd libs+host+packs -c release` is a little faster; if you only changed clr, then `build.cmd clr+host+packs -c release`

### 2. Delete your local package cache

```cmd
rd /s /q c:\localcache
```

### 3. Publish again

```cmd
dotnet publish
```

Now your app will use your updated package.
